Charles James Fox: From a Picture by Sir Joshua Reynolds in the Possession of Lord Holland Steel engraved portrait of Charles James Fox by J. W. Cook after a painting by Sir Joshua Reynolds Engraved portrait of the British statesman Charles James Fox (1749-1806). When, in 1806, Scott's political patron Henry Dundas, 1st Viscount Melville, was acquitted of misappropriation of public funds, Sir Walter Scott composed a celebratory song which mocked Melville's Whig opponents Samuel Whitbread and Charles James Fox: 'But the Brewer we'll hoax, | Tallyho to the Fox, | And drink MELVILLE for ever, as long as we live!' ('Health to Lord Melville', lines 82-84). These lines, composed when Fox was gravely ill, gave serious offence to his supporters and cost Scott the friendship of Dugald Stewart and the Countess of Rosslyn. Scott made partial amends by praising Fox's patriotism in the Introduction to Canto I of Marmion (1808): 'When Europe crouch'd to France's yoke, | And Austria bent, and Prussia broke, | And the firm Russian's purpose brave, | Was barter'd by a timorous slave, | Even then dishonour's peace he spurn'd, | The sullied olive-branch return'd, | Stood for his country's glory fast, | And nail'd her colours to the mast!' (lines 154-161). In the Introduction to the 1830 edition of Marmion, Scott recalls his reluctance to appeal to Fox to sort out a clerical error jeopardizing his appointment as Principal Clerk to the Court of Session. He feared that it might appear an expression of 'political opinions different from those which I have always professed', although 'in his private capacity, there is no man to whom I would have been more proud to owe an obligation'. Scott was also told that Fox admired his Lay of the Last Minstrel (1805), and wrote: 'Although my Tory principles prevent my coinciding with his political opinions, I am very proud of his approbation in a literary sense' (letter to George Ellis, 26 May 1805). The original portrait was painted by Reynolds in 1782-83. The Portrait Gallery of Distinguished Poets, vol. III. London: Wm. S. Orr & Co., 1853       
