Cervantes. After the Spanish print engraved by D. F. Selma Steel engraved portrait of Cervantes by E. Mackenzie after a print by F. Selma Engraved portrait of the Spanish writer Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra (1547-1616), author of Don Quixote. Over dinner with Captain Edward Cheney in Frascati on 1 May 1832, Scott claimed that it was Cervantes who first inspired in him the desire to excel in fiction. Indeed in the opening section of his first novel Waverley (1814), Scott hails Cervantes as his most significant predecessor while underlining his own innovations on his model: 'From the minuteness with which I have traced Waverley's pursuits,and the bias which these unavoidably communicated to his imagination, the reader may perhaps anticipate, in the following tale, an imitation of the romance of Cervantes. But he will do my prudence injustice in the supposition. My intention is not to follow the steps of that inimitable author, in describing such total perversion of intellect as misconstrues the objects actually presented to the senses, but that more common aberration from sound judgment, which apprehends occurrences indeed in their reality, but communicates to them a tincture of its own romantic tone and colouring.' (ch. 5) While studying at Edinburgh University Scott acquired sufficient Spanish to read Cervantes in the original. His works are saturated with references to Don Quixote and the Novelas ejemplares. The Tales of a Landlord each bear an epitaph from Don Quixote. The 'Introductory Epistle' to The Monastery (1820) cites Don Quixote as an example of the dangers of anonymous authorship, inspiring, like Scott's own novels, sequels from unscrupulous rivals. In the 'Introductory Address' to Count Robert of Paris and Castle Dangerous (1832), Scott's last published works, Scott again cites Cervantes's self-defence against critics who highlighted minor inconsistencies and loose ends in his narrative. The importance of Cervantes is also repeatedly acknowledged in Lives of the Novelists (1821-24) and the 'Essay on Chivalry' (1818). The original engraving by Fernando Selma from a design by Antonio Carnicero Mancio was first published in 1780. The Portrait Gallery of Distinguished Poets, vol. I. London: Wm. S. Orr & Co., 1853       
